OTAGENT-261 Add Datadog Operator instructions to `otel-agent` installation guide (#27769)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/agent/install_agent_with_collector.md

Install and set up the following on your machine:

- A Kubernetes cluster (v1.29+)
- [Helm (v3+)][54]
- [Docker][50]
- [kubectl][5]

## Install the Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector

### Select installation method

Choose one of the following installation methods:

> - [Datadog Operator][55]: a [Kubernetes-native][56] that approach that automatically reconciles and maintains your Datadog setup. It reports deployment status, health, and errors in its Custom Resource status, and it limits the risk of misconfiguration thanks to higher-level configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Datadog Operator][55]: A [Kubernetes-native][56] approach that automatically reconciles and maintains your Datadog setup. It reports deployment status, health, and errors in its Custom Resource status, and it limits the risk of misconfiguration thanks to higher-level configuration options.
```

> - [Helm chart][4]: quick and simple way to deploy Datadog Agent. It provides versioning, rollback, and templating capabilities, making deployments consistent, and easier to replicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Helm chart][4]: A straightforward way to deploy Datadog Agent. It provides versioning, rollback, and templating capabilities, making deployments consistent and easier to replicate.
```
Editing out "quick" and "simple" per Vale. The reason is that these could be viewed as subjective claims that might now match all users' experiences.

### Configure the Datadog Agent

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Datadog Operator" %}}

> After deploying the Datadog Operator, create the `DatadogAgent` resource that triggers the deployment of the Datadog Agent, Cluster Agent and Cluster Checks Runners (if used) in your Kubernetes cluster. The Datadog Agent will be deployed as a DaemonSet, running a pod on every node of your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After deploying the Datadog Operator, create the `DatadogAgent` resource that triggers the deployment of the Datadog Agent, Cluster Agent and Cluster Checks Runners (if used) in your Kubernetes cluster. The Datadog Agent deploys as a DaemonSet, running a pod on every node of your cluster.
```

> 1. Use datadog-agent.yaml file to specify your `DatadogAgent` deployment configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the `datadog-agent.yaml` file to specify your `DatadogAgent` deployment configuration.
```

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-agent.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
   apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
   kind: DatadogAgent
   metadata:
     name: datadog
   spec:
     global:
       clusterName: <CLUSTER_NAME>
       site: <DATADOG_SITE>
       credentials:
         apiSecret:
           secretName: datadog-secret
           keyName: api-key
         appSecret:
           secretName: datadog-secret
           keyName: app-key
{{< /code-block >}}

> - Replace `<CLUSTER_NAME>` with a name for your cluster.
> - Replace `<DATADOG_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][1]. Your site is {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}. (Ensure the correct SITE is selected on the right).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Replace `<CLUSTER_NAME>` with a name for your cluster.
  - Replace `<DATADOG_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][1]. Your site is {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}. (Ensure the correct **DATADOG SITE** is selected on the right.)
```

2. Switch the Datadog Agent image to use builds with embedded OpenTelemetry Collector:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-agent.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
  ...
  override:
    # Node Agent configuration
    nodeAgent:
      image:
        name: "gcr.io/datadoghq/agent:7.62.2-ot-beta"
        pullPolicy: Always
{{< /code-block >}}

<div class="alert alert-info">This guide uses a Java application example. The <code>-jmx</code> suffix in the image tag enables JMX utilities. For non-Java applications, use <code>7.62.2-ot-beta</code> instead.<br> For more details, see <a href="/containers/guide/autodiscovery-with-jmx/?tab=helm">Autodiscovery and JMX integration guide</a>.</div>

By default, the Agent image is pulled from Google Artifact Registry (`gcr.io/datadoghq`). If Artifact Registry is not accessible in your deployment region, [use another registry][2].

3. Enable the OpenTelemetry Collector and configure the essential ports:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-agent.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
  ...
  # Enable Features
  features:
    otelCollector:
      enabled: true
      ports:

>         - containerPort: 4317

Reviewer 2: If no ports are specified here then the operator will default to binding `4317/4318` ([see here](https://github.com/DataDog/datadog-operator/blob/a4f0b7c0c0b54589a9b5570e6f06f388dfe5a75d/internal/controller/datadogagent/feature/otelcollector/feature.go#L66-L80)). This option is to be used if you pass non default ports in the otel-config.yaml, in which case you need to respecify the ports here so the operator knows how to bind them. 

I think from this example it appears like setting this is necessary, whereas it's only when using non-default ports.

Author: Good point, thanks! Added a note about default port binding and how to override it. 🙇

          hostPort: 4317
          name: otel-grpc
        - containerPort: 4318
          hostPort: 4318
          name: otel-http
{{< /code-block >}}

> <div class="alert alert-warning">Setting ports 4317 or 4318 manually is only supported if the name matches the default <code>otel-grpc</code> or <code>otel-http</code>. Otherwise, it will result in a port conflict.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-warning">When configuring ports <code>4317</code> and <code>4318</code>, you must use the default names <code>otel-grpc</code> and <code>otel-http</code> respectively to avoid port conflicts.</div>
```

{{< /code-block >}}
{{% /collapse-content %}}

[1]: /getting_started/site
[2]: /containers/guide/changing_container_registry/
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Helm" %}}
Use a YAML file to specify the Helm chart parameters for the [Datadog Agent chart][1].

1. Create an empty `datadog-values.yaml` file:

```shell
touch datadog-values.yaml
```

<div class="alert alert-info">Unspecified parameters use defaults from <a href="https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/datadog/values.yaml">values.yaml</a>.</div>

2. Configure the Datadog API and application key secrets:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
datadog:
  site: <DATADOG_SITE>
  apiKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
  appKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
  logLevel: info
{{< /code-block >}}

Set `<DATADOG_SITE>` to your [Datadog site][2]. Otherwise, it defaults to `datadoghq.com`, the US1 site.

<div class="alert alert-warning">The log level <code>datadog.logLevel</code> parameter value should be set in lower case. Valid log levels are: <code>trace</code>, <code>debug</code>, <code>info</code>, <code>warn</code>, <code>error</code>, <code>critical</code>, <code>off</code>.</div>

> 3. Switch the Datadog Agent image tag to use builds with embedded OpenTelemetry Collector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Switch the Datadog Agent image tag to use builds with the embedded OpenTelemetry Collector:
```

      - containerPort: "4318" # default port for OpenTelemetry HTTP receiver
        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http
{{< /code-block >}}

> It is required to set the `hostPort` in order for the container port to be exposed to the external network. This enables configuring the OTLP exporter to point to the IP address of the node to which the Datadog Agent is assigned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the `hostPort` to expose the container port to the external network. This enables configuring the OTLP exporter to point to the IP address of the node where the Datadog Agent is assigned.
```

{{% /collapse-content %}}

[1]: https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/datadog/README.md
[2]: /getting_started/site/
[3]: /containers/guide/changing_container_registry/
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Datadog Operator" %}}
The Datadog Operator provides a sample OpenTelemetry Collector configuration that you can use as a starting point. If you need to modify this configuration, the Datadog Operator supports two ways of providing a custom Collector configuration:

> - **Inline configuration**: Add your custom collector configuration directly in the `features.otelCollector.conf.configData` field.
> - **ConfigMap-based configuration**: Store your collector configuration in a ConfigMap and reference it in the `features.otelCollector.conf.configMap` field. This approach allows you to keep Collector configuration decoupled from the `DatadogAgent` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Inline configuration**: Add your custom Collector configuration directly in the `features.otelCollector.conf.configData` field.
- **ConfigMap-based configuration**: Store your Collector configuration in a ConfigMap and reference it in the `features.otelCollector.conf.configMap` field. This approach allows you to keep Collector configuration decoupled from the `DatadogAgent` resource.
```

> ####  Inline Collector Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
####  Inline Collector configuration
```

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [infraattributes, batch]
          exporters: [debug, datadog, datadog/connector]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp, datadog/connector, prometheus]
          processors: [infraattributes, batch]
          exporters: [debug, datadog]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [infraattributes, batch]
          exporters: [debug, datadog]
{{< /code-block >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">The field for Collector config in the ConfigMap must be called <code>otel-config.yaml</code>.</div>

2. Reference the `otel-agent-config-map` ConfigMap in your `DatadogAgent` resource using `features.otelCollector.conf.configMap` parameter:
{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-agent.yaml" collapsible="false" >}}
  ...
  # Enable Features
  features:
    otelCollector:
      enabled: true
      ports:
        - containerPort: 4317
          hostPort: 4317
          name: otel-grpc
        - containerPort: 4318
          hostPort: 4318
          name: otel-http
      conf:
        configMap:
          name: otel-agent-config-map
{{< /code-block >}}

> The Operator automatically mounts `otel-config.yaml` from the ConfigMap into the Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector DaemonSet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Operator automatically mounts `otel-config.yaml` from the ConfigMap into the Agent's OpenTelemetry Collector DaemonSet.
```
I think this is a bit clearer.

### Deploy the Agent with the OpenTelemetry Collector

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Datadog Operator" %}}

> Deploy the Datadog Agent with the above configuration file:
> 
> ```shell
> kubectl apply -f datadog-agent.yaml
> ```
> 
> After deploying the Datadog Operator, create the `DatadogAgent` resource that triggers the deployment of the Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector as a DaemonSet. The Collector is running on the same host as your application, following the [Agent deployment pattern][1]. The [Gateway deployment pattern][2] is not supported.

Reviewer: `````suggestion
Deploy the Datadog Agent with the configuration file:

```shell
kubectl apply -f datadog-agent.yaml
```

This deploys the Datadog Agent as a DaemonSet with the embedded OpenTelemetry Collector. The Collector runs on the same host as your application, following the [Agent deployment pattern][1]. The [Gateway deployment pattern][2] is not supported.
`````

The second part is just describing the result, right? I don't think this is a separate action, so this suggestion should help make that more clear.
